### The Missing Curriculum

Incomplete list of things that I think would be good to teach as part of the standard K-12 education curriculum worldwide, in no particular order:
1. Computer programming
2. Personal finance. One full year. Credit scores (credit utilization, credit variety, how to get a score without having credit, etc.), home loans, inflation, all about credit cards, value investing versus speculation, good and bad debt, scams, how to format a resume, how and where to apply for job, how to  how to recognize a good/bad job+manager+career field+etc. A separate course on careers, actually (see point #17). A one-day career fair and a few guest speakers doesn't cut it when it comes to the most important single factor in life.
3. Basic statistics
4. A foreign language with a 100% conversational fluency-based approach.
   2 years of that, which will get most people to conversation fluency in nearly any language, replacing the standard 6+ years of grammar-based language learning.
   The grammar-based language learning, as most Americans can attest, doesn't achieve conversational proficiency.
5. 2 short study abroad programs in a country that speaks the language you learned
6. Nordic-style practical education on intimate relationships. They have a demonstrably effective model.
7. Health and fitness with most of the dodgeball removed in favor of things that will save/fix/extend/improve your life.
   Glycemic index, heavy weightlifting, middle distance running, intermittent fasting, each student getting a full blood panel done and discussing the results, exercise dosing (e.g. Copenhagen joggers study), highlights of the pragmatics of the endocrine system, smoking is bad, drugs are bad, alcohol is pretty much bad, role of retinal sun exposure, role of sleep (Swiss Army Knife of Health) and how to optimize and improve sleep, all about diet (everything from Mediterranean diet to Omega-3 to effects of sugar and carbs).
8. History and consequences of tempting but dumb ideas such as nationalism, communism, militarism beyond necessity (e.g. why does the US keep invading places?), theocracy, fascism, cults, reiki, homeopathy, juice diets, etc.
9. A practical course in religion and spirituality. Can navigate separation of church and state by merely presenting information. Survey of world religions and spiritual systems with as many as there's time for, and a focus on a statistically even sampling from religion vector space instead of a comprehensive coverage of all religions (there wouldn't be time) or focus on particular religions. Taoism, Islam, Christianity, Animism, Way of The Peaceful Warrior, Hinduism, Judaism, Jainism, Zoroastrianism, Rastafari, Confucianism, Buddhism, Shinto, Druze, etc.
10. A practical course on personality disorders. Particular focus on the Cluster B disorders, since they cause the most chaos. Recognizing the symptoms, navigating people with personality disorders, etiology + disease progression + prognosis for each disorder.
11. A practical course on sales, marketing, ethical persuasion, and relationship-building. "Whatever business you're in, your business is sales".
12. A practical course on entrepreneurship, sequenced after #11. I like Professor Tina Seelig's approach described here: https://www.inc.com/.../first-principles-stanford-tina.... Advertising, customer service, The Lean Startup, product-market fit, how to find customers, how to identify good versus bad customers, bootstrapping versus soliciting investment, types of investment with pros and cons of each, how and when to hire, retain, and fire talent, how to select a cofounder and whether to solo instead.
13. Physics. Currently, only about 25% of US high school students ever even take a course in physics. Physics builds a great framework for understanding and interacting with the world. Also, physics is truth with a capital T.
14. Practical philosophy. Philosophy is the meta-skill of how to think about knowledge itself. I think a good deal of mental computation in life for many people goes into self-discovering various parts of philosophy based on their everyday experiences, without knowing the terminology and larger framework. This could be accomplished more efficiently. Topics such as what even are the major areas of philosophy (Aesthetics, Epistemology, Ethics, Logic, Metaphysics, Philosophy of mind, Philosophy of science, etc). Even just knowing those gives a great framework for thinking.
    Likewise for common approaches to ethical philosophy (consequentialism - including utilitarianism, virtue ethics, deontology, etc.). People spend a lot of time reasoning and acting in terms of ethics. Philosophy is arguable a "high ROI" area of thinking to "strengthen". It would be nice to have a good language with which to speak about these things, both externally and inside our own minds.
    Imagine self-discovering the food pyramid from random experiment over a lifetime. Philosophy and physics would probably be the hardest to implement, because they're the most intellectually rigorous of these points. May not be doable for everyone, but could at least be a well-taught option for all.
15. A class in something like "human ecology". Who were the first humans?, ~83% of human genetic diversity is in Africa (https://biology.stackexchange.com/a/66240), how+why+when did humans defeat other species in inter-species competition, where did writing arise, which major civilizations have risen and fallen, what were the major migrations, conquests, and population-level events in human history.
    Could be two semesters, with one biology-focused and one world history-focused. World history is already a class in many places, though in this scheme it would be taught with an even global focus, and a focus on recurring patterns over things like dates. For example, self-similar fascist governments have risen and fallen for thousands of years.
16. Addiction. Taught with the disease model of addiction. Etiology, presentations of disease, treatments, how to avoid in the first place. Mesolimbic pathway, diathesis–stress model, etc.
17. Work and careers. Probably the most important area of them all. All practical aspects of them. Students take work-oriented personality tests (results kept private and only shared with the student) to check for fit/aptitude in different fields.
    Speak to the day-to-day realities of a job versus the "outsider" perspective. I once listened to a program by someone who worked as a crime scene investigator. He gave an example of a typical case he'd worked on.
    In that case, he spent ~6 months looking at fabric strands under a microscope in connection with a some crime scene evidence. His result, which he presented at the trial, was that the evidence was "inconclusive". He to keep that in mind if you just watched "CSI: Miami" and want become a CI. You'll want to be able to tolerate what you do for work, on a day-to-day basis, because one thing's for sure: you'll be doing a lot of it.
18. Speaking of work: practical training in a vocational skill that, even in the worst of markets, will pretty much always get you hired. This needs to not be separated out into vocational high schools versus non-vocational high schools.
    The training for the entry level for many options can be completed in 6 months or less. A classic option I like to think about is phlebotomy. A 48-hour course is sufficient to get hired, then there's more on-the-job training. It pays a basic yet generally living wage, while avoiding the perils of working retails (been there myself). Every student needs to come out with a skill they can rely on even if everything else doesn't work out.
19. A practical guide to what Carl Sagan, in his book "The Demon-Haunted World: Science as a Candle in the Dark" called the "The Baloney Detection Kit". This article has a good description as "Necessary cognitive fortification against propaganda, pseudoscience, and general falsehood": https://www.themarginalian.org/.../baloney-detection-kit.../.
20. Self-defense. Jiu-jitsu, boxing, running away, being on each side of common weapons (taught with a safety and self-defense mentality), legal defense, dealing with police, dealing with drunk/high/angry people, etc.
21. Credit freezes
22. give credit to Alex Hormozi for phlebotomy
23. "you're not doing the wrong things, you're in the wrong culture". "It's more about the ship you're in, and less about how hard you row" -> story from Charlie Munger. Consider that you're a perfectly fine person who's putting in effort, trying to be good, and so on, but you're just in a culture that's either: a) fairly unreasonable, b) completely unreasonable, b) completely unreasonable to you because of some characteristic you have (gender, political views, etc.). This is a particularly tricky one, because when you're in a given culture, you're surrounded by it, so it seems like the only possible reality. It's not. This is why the study abroad point mentioned in this list is so critical. It gives you a contrasting perspective. This is not merely about "broadening your horizons", "finding yourself", or "becoming more worldly". This may be the difference between life and death, or at the least, between a huge difference in success/happiness/human flourishing.
24. "find the work that doesn't feel like work". Also I need to read "on work and play" by Feynman and cite that maybe. Also cite "how to do what you love" by Paul Graham.
25. Add to the book about life the fact that the things that are really the best things that one can do or get in life tend to not be advertised for example have you ever seen an advertisement for going to Harvard University as an undergraduate nurse in an advertisement for that on television no

What you do see an advertising for all the time are things like joining the military buying a brand new SUV getting a credit card buying a house and those things can be good decisions under certain circumstances but there's basically no downside to going to Harvard as an undergraduate and all the upside and there's not really a catch in the same way there is for those other

Just to give some other examples sugary foods like soft drinks and candy other types of food that are bad for you like fast food television and stuff like that television programs dramas that waste your time and cigarettes alcohol there's a lot of advertising for those things

I'll even go except further there's a lot of advertising for things like day trading and entrepreneurship and flipping houses and things of that nature whereas I don't think I've ever seen a television I don't think I've ever seen sort of an advertisement for getting a normal job working hard making your boss happy and you know maybe putting in some overtime there's no advertisement for that

Many things that wealthy people do as well they specifically do not publish her advertise they're quite quiet about it so for example going to fancy colleges networking in certain circles buying and holding certain assets management of their finances saying their children up with credit cards even as kids so they go into adulthood with excellent credit scores and credit history and numerous other things eating you know good vegetables
26. -add to use "speak from day one" and the "Complete <X>" language books series to learn the foreign language
27. Seeing money won't make you happy or money doesn't make you happy or money doesn't can't buy happiness is one of the most meaningless pointless yet still incredibly dangerous things that people say in common speech

However having pneumonia makes you unhappy and oftentimes extremely unhappy and in certain circumstances it will kill you having pneumonia will literally kill you you'll see the proximal cause of death on for many people's deaths is actually pneumonia and there were a lot of things leading up to that but pneumonia is actually what killed them technically in a very real sense

Similarly having money won't make you happy but not having money will make you unhappy. Will make you unhappy 100% of the time and if you have literally zero money that will generally kill you
28. See this image for addition topics: https://media.licdn.com/dms/image/D4E22AQGpJfsJC4m2yA/feedshare-shrink_2048_1536/0/1690559114680?e=1693440000&v=beta&t=5RyGv5AjpQUTnI8zRDxdirJ4hV3YTjL8dOo8JcSV0lk
29. -become a manager of some kind, even if it's a manager of an ice cream shop for a summer. Do this as soon as possible. It will give you superpowers as an employee, because you'll know the *exact* behaviors your manager does and does not want you to exhibit. You'll outcompete your fellow employees, because they'll be thinking about their needs and blundering into annoying the boss. The boss will naturally want to allocate time/responsibility/power to you, the person who's making their life easier, is not threatening their authority, and is making them look good to their boss.

-don't listen to anyone who says title/rank/level in a hierarchy (company, military, etc.) doesn't matter. It matters, a *lot*. In my experience, being at the bottom sucks a lot more than being even a bit higher up. It's a ladder one climbs for a reason. Get climbing, your life will be better. An old saying is "shit rolls downhill".
30. -people who don't have any "classic" addictions in fact have healthy addictions. They are "addicted" things such as: the admiration and respect of their community, positive attention, true control over their own lives, expressing their honest opinions to an adoring audience (and to do so eloquently), proving wrong wrong people who doubted/slighted/hurt them, etc. Get addicted to that stuff if you can. Everyone is an addict of some kind.
31. -only date "by recommendation". That means, don't ever date a stranger. Only date people about whom you have a strongly informed understanding of their personality, beliefs, reputation, behavioral patterns, mental health, and so on. This will save you a massive amount of harm in life.
    -ideally, do the same for work. This may not be possible in your first few jobs, or before you really have a career. However, once you do, you should have impressed everyone you worked with and created a network of people you can call upon if you're ever looking for a new job. That person should be someone you trust deeply, so that when they say it's not too crazy of a place to work, you believe them with a pretty high degree of certainty. Only take jobs "by recommendation".
32. -how to deal with bullies (generally, fight back, but not if it'll literally kill you or similar)
    -the fact that you don't actually get arrested (usually) for fighting as a kid. It's kind of a loophole.
    -cultures are social operating systems. Different ones can run according to a *completely* different set of rules, assumptions, goals, etc. Realizing this is one of the goals of the study abroad piece. Other takeaway is that meaning is socially constructed. Sounds abstract, but it's real. Culture shock isn't finding out another culture has different opinions than your culture on the same concerns. It's finding out they don't even think/care about many of the same things *at all*. That's a much scarier initial realization. Your meaning/logos is being challenged.
    -the real world generally operates according to power and hierarchies. Get as much power as you can. Power is not inherently good or evil. It's up to you to do good stuff with your power. Put another way, never, ever be powerless. That's the most important thing written in this entire book.
33. -add "social proof". This is an EXTREMELY important topic. You'll always hear people say "I know five times more than he does, but he has a degree from <x>". Yes, tought shit. Get that degree yourself and enjoy the rewards. If anything, this effect is *underestimated*. This ties into the halo effect and confirmation bias.
34. -the most aggressively advertised products and services are generally the absolute worst things for you to select. Brand new SUVs, credit cards, gambling, soda, candy, alcohol, fast foot, TikTok, anything with zero money down, anything where you low credit/no credit is A-Ok, anything with 0% APR for an initial period. Have you ever seen a television commercial encouraging you to go to Harvard Law School? That's because it's such a good choice, they don't have to advertise.
35. -all about succeeding in different types of work environments. Corporate politics. Shit rolls downhill, get as high up as you can. How to win friends and influence people, 48 laws of power is the bible of the working world, how to "manage your manager", your #1 job (and in a sense, your only job) is to make your boss look good (no an exaggeration). How to not take work personally. How to 10% entrepreneur. Positive reinforcement wins people over. Listening is a superpower, even if you don't like the person, don't care or hate what they're saying, etc. You win any negotiation before you go into the negotiation, based on the bargaining position and other options you have. If you don't have any money, you'll take a job for under-market rate salary. If you have multiple offers and your own business, you probably won't.
36. -having a positive attitude, even if you're faking it (and trust me, you'll be faking it) is a powerful way to get ahead at work. People will want you around if you have a positive attitude. They'll put you on their projects, want to work with you, etc. It's a pain in the neck to do when you want to actually say what you think, but it works.
37. -the problem you're struggling with, whether it be a major illness, bad relationship, or homelessness, has almost certainly been encountered by countless people before. Billions of people have lived before, and been in all manner of different situations in life. Seek out the findings of those who came before you. Whether it be the keys to a successful marriage, how to heal from depression, how to get into a prestigious university, or how to move up the ladder at work. The keys are often a combination of the obvious and the counterintuitive.

38. For example, counterintuitive: readily admit your mistakes at work (e.g. Jocko Willink's Extreme Ownership) and people will see you as trustworthy. For example, obvious: just simply never drink alcohol for any reason. The downsides outweigh the upsides, so don't do it. Or, obvious: that, yes, you should dump your abusive boyfriend/girlfriend immediately, not try to make it work.
39. Add to self-defense part more kinds of self-defense, including:
    -verbal self-defense: shutting down passive aggression, NVC (non-violent communication), how to talk to lowlifes/stupid people, etc.
    -how to maintain your boundaries in life (in general), the importance of saying "no" (Gabor Mate, etc.)
    -financial self-defense: how to recognize scams, bubbles, fraud in general, whether someone has your best interest in mind, the fact that the most aggressively marketed products and services tend to make for the worst financial decisions (cite Quora post from years ago: brand-new SUVs, credit cards with 24% APRs, adjustable-rate debt, "rent-to-own" (not what it sounds like), "no money down", and so on).
40. Add the inner ring to the high school advice book
41. Add the Drama Triangle to the advice book 
42. Add the fact that most feedback loops in the real world are positive feedback loops, not negative feedback loops. Disney movies tend to showcase negative feedback loops, such as rags to riches. In the real world, it's much more typical to have rags to rags, and riches to more riches. Having $100,000 in your bank account makes it much easier to get the next $100,000. Poverty tends to beget worse poverty. Wealth begets more wealth. Sickness begets more sickness. Woe begets woe.
